#### 4.2 Implicit Sequences

A sequence can be presented without each element being stored explicity in the memory of the computer.

That is, we can construct an object that procides access to all of the elements of some sequential dataset <u>without computing the value of each element in advance</u>. Instead, we compute elements on demand.

> A `range` represents a consecutive bounded sequence of integers. However, it is not the case that each element of that sequence is represented explicitly in memory. Instead, when an element is requested from a `range`, it is computed.
>
> Hence, we can <u>represent very large ranges of integers without using large blocks of memory.</u> Only the end points of the range are stored as part of the `range` object.
>
> ```python
> r = range(100, 100000000)
> ```

###### lazy computation

Computing values on demand, rather than retrieving them from an existing representation, is an example of ==lazy computation==. 

In computer science, lazy computation describes any program that delays the computation of a value until that value is needed.



#### 4.2.1 Iterators

> An `iterator` is an object that provides sequential acess to values, one by one.
>
> The iterator abstraction has two components: 
>
> 1. a mechanism for retrieving the next element in the sequence being processed
> 2. The mechanism for signaling that the end of the sequence has been reached

```python
>>> primes = [2, 3, 5, 7]
>>> type(primes)
>>> iterator = iter(primes)
>>> type(iterator)
>>> next(iterator)
2
>>> next(iterator)
3

>>> next(iterator)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
StopIteration
>>> try:
        next(iterator)
    except StopIteration:
        print('No more values')
No more values
```

An iterator provides a mechanism for considering each of a series of values in turn, but all of those elements do not need to be stored simultaneously. Instead, when the next element is requested from an iterator, that element may be computed on demand instead of being retrieved from an existing memory source.

#### 4.2.2 Iterables

Any value that can produce iterators is called an `iterable` value.

Iterables include sequence values such as <u>list, strings, tuples</u> as well as other containers such as <u>sets and dictionaries.</u>

###### Dictionary as iterables

```python
>>> d = {'one': 1, 'two': 2, 'three': 3}
>>> d
{'one': 1, 'three': 3, 'two': 2}
>>> k = iter(d)
>>> next(k)
'one'
>>> next(k)
'three'
>>> v = iter(d.values())
>>> next(v)
1
>>> next(v)
3
```



#### 4.2.3 Built-in Iterators

Several built-in functions take as arguments iterable values and return iterators. These functions are used extensively for lazy sequence processing.

* `map()`
* `filter()`
* `zip()`
* `reversed()`

###### Example: map()

```python
>>> def double_and_print(x):
        print('***', x, '=>', 2*x, '***')
        return 2*x
>>> s = range(3, 7)
>>> doubled = map(double_and_print, s)  # double_and_print not yet called
>>> next(doubled)                       # double_and_print called once
*** 3 => 6 ***
6
>>> next(doubled)                       # double_and_print called again
*** 4 => 8 ***
8
>>> list(doubled)                       # double_and_print called twice more
*** 5 => 10 ***
*** 6 => 12 ***
[10, 12]
```



#### 4.2.4 For Statement

The `for` statement in Python operates on iterators.

```pseudocode
for <name> in <expression>:
		<suite>
```

> Mechanism of `for` statement
>
> 1. Python evaluates the header`<expression>`, which must yield an iterable value.
> 2. Then, the \_iter_ method is invoked on that value.
> 3. Until a `stopIteration` exception is raised, Python repeatedly invokes the \_next_ method on that iterator and binds the result to the `<name>` in the `for` statement.
> 4. Then it excutes the `<suit>`



#### 4.2.5 Generators and Yield Statement

> A `generator` is an iterator returned by a special class of function called a `generator function`.
>
> Generator functions are distinguished from regular functions in that rather than containing `return` statements in their body, they use `yield` statement to return elements of a series.

```python
>>> def letters_generator():
        current = 'a'
        while current <= 'd':
            yield current
            current = chr(ord(current)+1)
>>> for letter in letters_generator():
        print(letter)
a
b
c
d
```

When called, a generator function doesn't return a particular yielded value, but instead a ==`generator`== (which is a type of iterator) that itself can return the yielded values. A generator object has `__iter__` and `__next__` methods, and each call to `__next__` continues execution of the generator function from wherever it left off previously until another `yield` statement is executed.

> Mechanism of generator:
>
> The first time `__next__` is called, the program executes statements from the body of the function until it encounters the `yield` statement.
>
> Then, it pauses and returns the value. `yield` statements do not destroy the newly created environment, they preserve it for later.
>
> When `__next__` is called again, execution resumes where it left offf.

The generator **does not start** executing any of the body statements of its generator function until the first time `__next__` is invoked.

The generator raises a `StopIteration` exception whenever its generator function returns.



#### 4.2.6 Iterable Interface

An object is iterable if it returns an iterator when its `__iter__` method is invoked.

Iterable values represent data collections, and they provide a fixed representation that may produce more than one iterator.

```python
class Letters:
    def __init__(self, start = 'a', end = 'e'):
        self.start = start
        self.end = end
    def __iter__(self):
        return LetterIter(self.start, self.end)

>>> b_to_k = Letters('b', 'k')
>>> first_iterator = b_to_k.__iter__()
>>> next(first_iterator)
'b'
>>> next(first_iterator)
'c'
>>> second_iterator = iter(b_to_k)
>>> second_iterator.__next__()
'b'
```



#### 4.2.7  Creating Iterables with Yield

```python
>>> class LettersWithYield:
        def __init__(self, start='a', end='e'):
            self.start = start
            self.end = end
        def __iter__(self):
            next_letter = self.start
            while next_letter < self.end:
                yield next_letter
                next_letter = chr(ord(next_letter)+1)
```

The `__iter__` method is a generator function; it returns a generator object that yields the letters 'a' through 'd' and then stops.

#### 4.2.8  Iterator Interface

The Python iterator interface is defined using a method called `__next` that returns the next element of some underlying sequential series that it represents.

Calls to `__next__` make a **mutating** change to the iterator, the advance the position of the iterator.

```python
>>> class LetterIter:
        """An iterator over letters of the alphabet in ASCII order."""
        def __init__(self, start='a', end='e'):
            self.next_letter = start
            self.end = end
        def __next__(self):
            if self.next_letter == self.end:
                raise StopIteration
            letter = self.next_letter
            self.next_letter = chr(ord(letter)+1)
            return letter
```

Iterators also allow us to represent infinite series by implementing a `__next__` method that never raises a `StopIteration` exception.



#### 4.2.9  Streams

TODO -- now is 7/10/2022



#### 4.2.10  Python Streams

Streams offer another way to represent sequential data implicitly. A stream is a **`lazily`** computed linked list. Unlike an `Link`, the `rest` of a stream is only computed when it is looked up, rather than being stored in advnace.

To achieve this lazy evaluation, a stream stores a function that computes the rest of the stream. A stream stores how to compute the rest of the stream, rather than always storing the rest explicitly.

```python
>>> class Stream:
        """A lazily computed linked list."""
        class empty:
            def __repr__(self):
                return 'Stream.empty'
        empty = empty()
        def __init__(self, first, compute_rest=lambda: empty):
            assert callable(compute_rest), 'compute_rest must be callable.'
            self.first = first
            self._compute_rest = compute_rest
        @property
        def rest(self):
            """Return the rest of the stream, computing it if necessary."""
            if self._compute_rest is not None:
                self._rest = self._compute_rest()
                self._compute_rest = None
            return self._rest
        def __repr__(self):
            return 'Stream({0}, <...>)'.format(repr(self.first))
```



##### Linked list vs. Stream

```python
>>> r = Link(1, Link(2+3, Link(9)))
>>> s = Stream(1, lambda: Stream(2+3, lambda: Stream(9)))

>>> r.first
1
>>> s.first
1
>>> r.rest.first
5
>>> s.rest.first
5
>>> r.rest
Link(5, Link(9))
>>> s.rest
Stream(5, <...>)
```



> 1. When a `Stream` instance is constructed, the field `self._rest` is `None`, signifying that the rest of the `Stream` has not yet been computed.
> 2. When the `rest` attribute is requested via a dot expression, the `rest` property method is invoked, which triggers computation with `self._rest = self._compute_rest()`.