### Efficiency

* Programming cost
  * How long to develop your programs?
  * How easy to read, modify and **maintain** your code?
* Execution cost
  * Time
  * Memory

#### Java features

* **Packages**
  * Keep code organized
* **Static type checking**
  * Speed up runtime
  * Catch errors early
* **Inheritance**
  * Subtype polymorphism
  * Code reuse

#### Programming Practice

* **Modularity**
  * How to break problem down into subproblems

* **Invariants**
  * What properties must my algorithm or data structure maintain
* **Testing**
* **Module**
  * A set of methods that work together as a whole to perform some tasks.
  * **Encapsulated**



### API

* The API (**Application Programming Interface**) of an ADT is the list of **constructors** and **methods**, including an informal description of the **effects** of each.
* API consists of **syntactic** and **semantic** specification.
  * Semantic specification usually written out in English.
* The idea of **hiding details** from yourself or other programmers is critically important.

##### Designing an API

* Hard
* Iterative

### ADT Implementations

Stack -- LinkedList

#### Extension

```java
public class ExtensionStack<Item> extends LinkedList<Item> {
	public void push(Item x) {
   	   add(x);
	}
}
```

* Is-a relationship

#### Delegation

* --represent

```java
public class DelegationStack<Item> {
	private LinkedList<Item> L = new LinkedList<Item>();
	public void push(Item x) {
   	    L.add(x);
	}
}
```

#### Adaptation

* Allow clinet to design which List to pass into

```java
public class StackAdapter<Item> {
	private List L;
	public StackAdapter(List<Item> worker) {
   	    L = worker;
	}
 
	public void push(Item x) {
   	    L.add(x);
	}
}
```

###### Is-A vs.Has a

* **Inheritance** relationships should ALWAYS be **is-a** relationships

### Views

* An alternative representation of an existing object.
  * Like iterator
  * keySet()