### 3.3 Exceptions

Programmers must be always mindful of possible erros that may arise in programs

- a function may not receive arguments that it is designed to accept
- a necessary resource maybe missing
- a connection across a network may be lost

> **Exceptions**, provides a general mechanism for adding error-handling logic to programs.
>
> Raising an exception is a technique for interrupting the normal flow of exectuion in a program, signaling thagt some excetional circumstance has arisen, and returning directly to an enclosing part of the program that was designated to react to that circumstance.
>
> The Python interpreter raises an exception each time it detects an error in an expression or statement. 
>
> Users can also raise exceptions with `raise` and `assert` statements.

##### Raising exceptions

An exception is an **object instance** with a class that inherits either directly or indirectly from the `BaseException` class.

The assert statement raises an exception with the class `AssertionError`.

```python
assert is_tree(branch)

def assert_false():
    assert False, 'False!'
```

In general, any exception instance can be raised with the `raise` statement

```python
>>> raise Exception('An error occurred')
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
Exception: an error occurred
```

When an exception is raised, no further statements in the current block of code are executed. Unless the exception is **handled**, the interpreter will return directly to the interactive read-eval-print loop, or terminate entirely if Python was started with a file argument.

In addiion, the interpreter will print a **stack backtrace**, which is a structure block of text that describes the nested set of active functions calls in the branch of execution in which the exception was raised.

In the example above, the file name `<stdin>` indicates that the exception was raised by the user in an interactive session, rather than from code in a file.

##### Handling exceptions

An exception can be handled by an enclosing `try` statement

```python
try:
    <try suite>
except <exception class> as <name>:
    <except suit>
...
```

* The `<try suite>` is always executed immediately when the `try` statement is executed.
* Suited of the `except` clauses are only executed when an exception is raised during the course of executing the `<try suite>`
* Each `except` clause specifies the particular class of exception to handle. For instance, if the `<exception class>` is `AssertionError`, then any instance of a class inheriting from `AssertionError` that is raised during the course of executing the `<try suite>` will be handled by the following `<except suite>`. 
* Within the `<except suite>`, the identifier `<name>` is bound to the exception object that was raised, but this binding does not persist beyond the `<except suite>`.

###### Example: ZeroDivisionError

```python
try:
	x = 1 / 0
except ZeroDivitionError as e:
    print('handling a', type(e))
    x = 0
  
# handling indirectly exception
>>> def invert(x):
        result = 1/x  # Raises a ZeroDivisionError if x is 0
        print('Never printed if x is 0')
        return result
>>> def invert_safe(x):
        try:
            return invert(x)
        except ZeroDivisionError as e:
            return str(e)
>>> invert_safe(2)
Never printed if x is 0
0.5
>>> invert_safe(0)
'division by zero'
```



#### 3.3.1 Exception Objects

Exception objects themselves can have attributes, such as the erro message stated in an `assert` statement.

User defined exception classes can have additional attributes.

###### Example: Newton's method

1. Define a new class that inheirts from `Exception`

```python
>>> class IterImproveError(Exception):
        def __init__(self, last_guess):
            self.last_guess = last_guess
```

2. Define our generic iterative improment algorithm with handling `ValueError`

```python
>>> def improve(update, done, guess=1, max_updates=1000):
        k = 0
        try:
            while not done(guess) and k < max_updates:
                guess = update(guess)
                k = k + 1
            return guess
        except ValueError:
            raise IterImproveError(guess)
```

3. Final result

```python
>>> def find_zero(f, guess=1):
        def done(x):
            return f(x) == 0
        try:
            return improve(newton_update(f), done, guess)
        except IterImproveError as e:
            return e.last_guess
```

Python's exception mechanism allowed us to <u>separate the logic</u> for iterative improvement, which appears unchanged in the suite of the `try` clause, from the logic for handling errors, which appears in `except` clauses.