### 1.7. Recursive Functions

> * A function is called **recursive** if the body of the function calls the function itself, either directly or indirectly.
>
> * That is, the process of executing the body of a recursive function may in tur nrequire applying that function again.
>
> * When designing recursive functions, we look for ways in which a problem *<u>can be broken down into simpler problems</u>*.

###### Example 1. Sum the digits

```python
def sum_digits(n):
    if n < 10:
        return n
    else:
        all_but_last, last = n //10, n % 10
        return sum_digits(all_but_last) + last
```



#### 1.7.1 The anatomy of recursive functions

> The body of many recursive functions:
>
> 1. Begins with a ==base case==: a conditional statement that defines the behavior of the function for the inputs that are simplest to process.
>
> 2. Then follows by one or more ==recursive calls==: recursive calls always simplify the original problem

###### Example 2. Factorial

```python
def fact_iter(n):
    total, k = 1, 1
    while k <= n:
        total, k = total * k, k + 1
    return total

def fact(n):
    if n == 0:
        return 1
    else:
        return n * fact(n - 1)
```

##### Recursive leap of faith

> <u>*Treating a recursive call as a functional abstraction*</u> has been called a recursive leap of faith
>
> We define a function in terms of itself, but simply trust that the simpler cases will work correctly when verify the correctness of the function.
>
> In the example, we trust that `fact(n - 1)` will correctly compute $(n - 1)!$; we must only check that n! is computed correctly if this assumption holds.
>
> In this way, verifying the correctness of a recursive function is a form of proof by induction. 归纳法

* In general, iterative functinos must maintain some **local state** that changes throughout the course of computation. At any point in the iteration, that state characterizes the result of completed work and the amount of work remaining.



#### 1.7.2 Mutual Recursion

> When a recursive procedure is divided among two functinos that call each other, the functions are said to be **mutually recursive**.

###### Example 3. luhn_sum

```python
def luhn_sum(n):
    if n < 10:
        return n
    else:
        all_but_last, last = split(n)
        return luhn_sum_double(all_but_last) + last

def luhn_sum_double(n):
    all_but_last, last = split(n)
    luhn_digit = sum_digits(2 * last)
    if n < 10:
        return luhn_digit
    else:
        return luhn_sum(all_but_last) + luhn_digit

res2 = luhn_sum_double(4400660097848229)
```

* Mutual recursion is no more mysterious or powerful than simple recursion.



#### 1.7.3 Printing in recursive functinos

The computatinoal process evolved by a recursive function can often be visualized using calls to `print`.

###### Example 4. Order of recursive calls

```python
def cascade(n):
    if n < 10:
        print(n)
    else:
        print("before", n)
        cascade(n // 10)
        print("after", n)

res1 = cascade(321)
```

---



#### 1.7.4 Tree Recursion

> In ==tree recursion== ia function calls itself more than once.
>
> A function with multiple recursive calls is said to be *tree recursive* because each call branches into multiple smaller calls, each of which branches into yet smaller calls, just as the branches of a tree become smaller but more numerous as they extend from the trunk.

###### Example 5. Fibonacci

```python
def fib(n):
    if n == 0:
        return 0
    elif n == 1:
        return 1
    else:
        return fib(n - 2) + fib(n - 1) 
```



#### 1.7.5 Example Partitions

The number of partitions of a positive integer `n`, using parts up to size `m`, is the number of ways in which `n` can be expressed as the sum of positive integer parts up to `m` in increasing order. 

1. `6 = 2 + 4`
2. `6 = 1 + 1 + 4`
3. `6 = 3 + 3`
4. `6 = 1 + 2 + 3`
5. `6 = 1 + 1 + 1 + 3`
6. `6 = 2 + 2 + 2`
7. `6 = 1 + 1 + 2 + 2`
8. `6 = 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 2`
9. `6 = 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1`

The number of ways to partition `n` using integers up to `m` equals

1. the number of ways to partition `n-m` using integers up to `m`, and
2. the number of ways to partition `n` using integers up to `m-1`.

```python
# decorator
def trace(f):
    def g(n, m):
        result = f(n, m)
        print(f.__name__ + '(' + str(n) + ', ' + str(m) + ') -> ' + str(result))
        return result
    return g


# partition number n, using parts up to size m
@trace
def count_partitions(n, m):
    if n == 0:
        return 1
    elif n < 0:
        return 0
    elif m == 0:
        return 0
    else:
        with_m = count_partitions(n - m, min(m, n - m))
        without_m = count_partitions(n, m - 1)
        return with_m + without_m
```





Hint:

1. Remember ==helper functions== are useful if you need to keep track of more variables than the given parameters, or if you need to change the value of the input.