### 2.2 Data abstraction

For example, a gepgraphic position has latitude and longitude coordinates.

To represent positions, we would like our programming language to have the capacity to couple together a latitude and longitude to form a pair, a **compound data value** that our programs can manipulate as **a single conceptual unit**, but which also has two parts that can be considered individually.

The use of compound data enables us to increase the **modularity** of our programs.

The general technique of isolating the parts of a program that deal with how data are represented from the parts that deal with how data are manipulated is a powerful design methodology called ==data abstraction==.

Data abstraction makes programs much easier to design, maintain, and modify.

Data abstraction is similar in character to functional abstraction. Analogously, <u>data abstraction isolates how a compound data value is used from the details of how it is constructed.</u>

The basic idea of data abstraction is to **structure** programs so that they operate on abstract data. That is , our programs should use data in such a way as to make as few assumptions about the data as possible. At the same time, a concreate data representation is defined as an **independent** part of the program.



#### 2.2.1 Example: Rational Numbers

$$
\frac{numerator}{denominator}
$$

###### Constructor and selectors

```python
rational(n, d) # returns the rational number with numerator n and denominator d.
numer(x) # returns the numerator of the rational number x.
denom(x) # returns the denominator of the rational number x.
```

* We are using a powerful strategy for designing programs: ==wishful thinking==: if we did define these functions, we could then `add, multipy, print, test equality` of rational numbers

```python
def add_rational(x, y):
    nx, dx = numer(x), denom(x)
    ny, dy = numer(y), denom(y)
    return rational(nx * dy + ny * dx, dx * dy)

def mul_rational(x, y):
    return rational(numer(x) * numer(y), denom(x) * denom(y))

def rationals_are_equal(x, y):
    return numer(x) * denom(y) == numer(y) * denom(x)

def print_rational(x):
    print(numer(x), "/", denom(x))
```

* What we need is some way to glue together a numerator and a denominator into a compound value.

#### 2.2.2 Pairs

To enable us to implement the concreate level of our data abstraction, Python provides a compound structure called a **list**.

##### Lists

A list which can be constructed by placing expressions within **square brackets** sperated by commas. `[10, 20]`

###### Access the element

1. multiple assignment

```python
pair = [10, 20]
x, y = pair
```

2. <u>element selection</u>

```python
pair[0]
pair[1]
```

Lists in Python are **0-index**. One intuition that supports the indexing convention is that the index represents how far an element is offset from the beginning of the list.

```python
from operator import getitem
getitem(pair, 0)
getitem(pair, 1)
```



##### Representing rational numbers

```python
# constructor and selectors
def rational(n, d):
    """Construct a rational number x that represents n / d"""
    return [n,d]

def numer(x):
    """Return the numerator of rational number x"""
    return x[0]

def denom(x):
    """Return the denominator of rational number x"""
    return x[1]
```

###### greatest common denominator

Reduce the numerator and denominator to lowest terms

```python
from fractions import gcd
def rational(n, d):
    g = gcd(n, d)
    return (n//g, d//g)
```

* This improvement was accomplished by changing the constructor without changing any of the functions that implement the actual arithmetic operations.



#### 2.2.3 Abstraction Barriers

In general, the underlying idea of data abstraction is to identily a basic set of operations interms of which all manipulations of values of some kind will be expressed, and then to use only those operation in manipulating the data.

| **Parts of the program that...**                  | **Treat rationals as...**   | **Using only...**                                            |
| ------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Use rational numbers to perform computation       | whole data values           | `add_rational, mul_rational, rationals_are_equal, print_rational` |
| Create rationals or implement rational operations | numerators and denominators | `rational, numer, denom`                                     |
| Implement selectors and constructor for rationals | two-element lists           | list literals and element selection                          |

> In each layer above, the functions in the final column enforce an abstraction barrier. These functions are called by a higher level and implemented using a lower level of abstraction.
>
> An **abstraction barrier violation** occurs whenever a part of the program that can use a higher level function instead uses a function in a lower level.
>
> For example, a function that computes the square of a rational number is best implemented in terms of `mul_rational`

```python
def square_rational(x):
    return mul_rational(x, x)

def square_rational_violating_once(x):
    return rational(numer(x)*numer(x), denom(x) * denom(x))

def square_rational_violating_twice(x):
    return [x[0] * x[0], x[1] * x[1]]
```



* Abstraction barriers make programs easier to maintain and to modify.
* The fewer functions that depend on a particular representation, the fewer changes are required when one wants to change that representation.
* All of these implementation of `square_rational` have the correct behavior, but only the first is robust ot future changes.



#### 2.2.4 The properties of data

As long as the behavior conditions are met (such as the division property above), the selectors and constructors constitute a valid representation of a kind of data.

We can implement two functions `pair` and `select` to represent the rational number,

```python
# rational implemented as functions
def rational(n, d):
    def select(name):
        if name == 'n':
            return n
        elif name == 'd':
            return d
    return select

def numer(x):
    return x('n')

def denom(x):
    return x('d')
```

Functions are sufficient to represent compound data.