### 2.4 Mutable Data

One powerful techinique for creating modular programs is to incorporate data that may **change state.** In this way, a single data object can represent something that evolves independently of the rest of the program.

Adding state to data is a central ingredient of a paradigm called object-oriented programming.



#### 2.4.1 The Object Metaphor

Functions vs. Data

* functions performed operations

* data were operated upon

> ==**Objects**== combine data values with behavior.
>
> Objects represent information, but also behave like the things that they represent.
>
> Objects are <u>both information and processes</u>, bundled together to represent the properties, interactions, and behaviors of complex things.

###### Example: Date object

```python
>>> from datatime import data
>>> tues = data(2014, 5, 13)
>>> print(data(2014, 5, 19) - tues)
6 days, 0:00:00
```

* The name $data$ is bound to a $class$. A class represents a kiind of value. Individual datas are called <u>instances</u> of that class.
* Instances can be *constructed* by calling the class on arguments that characterize the instance.



###### Attributes

Objects have attributes, which are named values that are part of the object. We use dot notation to designated an attribute of an object.

```pseudocode
<expression>.<name>
   object   attribute
```

These attribute names are not available in the general environment. Instead, attribute names are particular to the object instance preceding the dot.

```python
>>> tues.year
2014
>>> tues.strftime('%A, %B %d')
'Tuesday, May 13'
```

Objects also have methods. which are function-valued attributes.

By implementation, methods are functions that compute their results from both their arguments and their object.



###### Strings

```python
>>> '1234'.isnumeric()
True
>>> 'rOBERT dE nIRO'.swapcase()
'Robert De Niro'
>>> 'eyes'.upper().endswith('YES')
True
```

In fact, all values in Python are objects.



#### 2.4.2 Sequence Objects

Instances of primitive built-in values such as numbers are **immutable.** Lists on the other hand are mutable.

Mutable objects are used to represent values that change over time.

###### Example: cards

```python
>>> chinese = ['coin', 'string', 'myriad']  # A list literal
>>> suits = chinese                         # Two names refer to the same list

>>> suits.pop()             # Remove and return the final element
'myriad'
>>> suits.remove('string')  # Remove the first element that equals the argument

>>> suits.append('cup')              # Add an element to the end
>>> suits.extend(['sword', 'club'])  # Add all elements of a sequence to the end

>>> suits[2] = 'spade'  # Replace an element

>>> suits[0:2] = ['heart', 'diamond']  # Replace a slice
>>> suits
['heart', 'diamond', 'spade', 'club']
```

<u>All of these mutation operations change the value of the list; they do not create new list objects.</u>

`l = l + [3, 4]` -- create a new list and assign the new list to l

###### Sharing and identity

With mutable data, methods called on one name can affect another name at the same time.

```python
>>> chinese  # This name co-refers with "suits" to the same changing list
['heart', 'diamond', 'spade', 'club']
```

Lists can be copied using the `list()` constructor function. Changes to one list do not affect another, unless they share structure.

```python
>>> nest = list(suits)  # Bind "nest" to a second list with the same elements
>>> nest[0] = suits     # Create a nested list
```



###### Comparison operators

`is` checks for identity.

`==` checks for the equality of contents.

###### List comprehensions

A list comprehension always creates a new list.

```python
>>> from unicodedata import lookup
>>> [lookup('WHITE ' + s.upper() + ' SUIT') for s in suits]
['♡', '♢', '♤', '♧']
```



##### Tuples

> A tuple, an instance of the built-in tuple type, is an **immutable** sequence.
>
> Tuples are created using a tuple literal that separates element expressions by commas. 
>
> Parentheses are optional but used commonly in practice. Any objects can be placed within tuples.

```python
>>> 1, 2 + 3
(1, 5)
>>> type( (10, 20) )
<class 'tuple'>
```

While it is not possible to change which elements are in a tuple, it is possible to change the value of a mutable element contained within a tuple.

Tuples are used implicitly in multiple assignment. An assignment of two values to two names creates a two-element tuple and then unpacks it.



#### 2.4.3 Dictionaries

> Dictionaries are built-in data type for storing an manipulating **correspondence relationship.**
>
> A dictionary contains key-value pairs, where both the keys and values are object. <u>unordered</u>
>
> The purpose of a dictionary is to provide an abstraction for storing and retrieving values that are indexed not by consecutive integers, but by descriptive keys.

```python
>>> numerals = {'I': 1.0, 'V': 5, 'X': 10}
>>> numerals['X']
10

# adding and changing values
>>> numerals['I'] = 1
>>> numerals['L'] = 50
>>> numerals
{'I': 1, 'X': 10, 'L': 50, 'V': 5}

# dict constructor
>>> dict([(3, 9), (4, 16), (5, 25)])
{3: 9, 4: 16, 5: 25}
```

###### Iterate the dictionary

```python
dict.keys()
dict.values()
dict.items()
```

###### Restrictions:

- A key of a dictionary cannot be or contain a mutable value.
- There can be at most one value for a given key.

###### get()

```pseudocode
get(key, default value)
```

###### Dictionary comprehension

```python
>>> {x: x*x for x in range(3,6)}
{3: 9, 4: 16, 5: 25}
```



#### 2.4.4 Local State

Lists and dictionaries have *local state*: they are changing values that have some particular contents at any point in the execution of a program.

Functions can also have local state

###### Example: bank account

```python
>>> def make_withdraw(balance):
        """Return a withdraw function that draws down balance with each call."""
        def withdraw(amount):
            nonlocal balance                 # Declare the name "balance" nonlocal
            if amount > balance:
                return 'Insufficient funds'
            balance = balance - amount       # Re-bind the existing balance name
            return balance
        return withdraw
      

>>> withdraw = make_withdraw(100)
>>> withdraw(25)
75
>>> withdraw(25)
50
>>> withdraw(60)
'Insufficient funds'
>>> withdraw(15)
35
```

* This user-defined function is non-pure. Calling the function not only returns a value, but also has the side effect of changing the function in some way, so that the next call with the same argument will return a different value.

##### nonlocal

> The `nonlocal` statement declares that whenever we change the binding of the name `balance`, <u>the binding is changed in the first frame in which `balance` is already bound</u>.
>
> Recall that without the `nonlocal` statement, an assignment statement would always bind a name in the first frame of the current environment.
>
> The effect of a `nonlocal` statement in Python: a name outside of the first local frame can be changed by an assignment statement.

After executing `nonlocal balance`, any assignment statement with `balance` on the left-hand side of `=` will not bind `balance` in the first frame of the current environment. Instead, it will find the first frame in which `balance` was already defined and re-bind the name in that frame.

 If `balance` has not previously been bound to a value, then the `nonlocal` statement will give an error.



Ever since we first encountered nested `def` statements, we have observed that a locally defined function can **look up** names outside of its local frames.

After a `nonlocal` statement can a function **change** the binding of names in these frames,

###### roles for assignment statement

1. created a new bindings
2. rebound existing names(local)
3. rebound existing names(nonlocal)



##### Python particulars

* Within the body of a function, all instances of a name must refer to the same frame.
* As a result, Python cannot look up the value of a name in a non-local frame, then bind that same name in the local frame, because the same name would be accessed in two different frames in the same function.

```python
def make_withdraw(balance):
    def withdraw(amount):
        if amount > balance: 
          ## UnboundLocalError: local variable 'balance' referenced before assignment
            return 'Insufficient funds'
        balance = balance - amount
        return balance
    return withdraw

wd = make_withdraw(20)
wd(5)
```

* Interpreter design: pre-computing



#### 2.4.5 The benefits of Non-local assignment

> Non-local assignment is an important step on our path to viewing a program as a collection of indepent and autonomous **object.**
>
> In particular, non-local assignment has given us the ability to maintain some state that is local to a **function**, but evolves over successive calls to that function.

#### 2.4.6 The Cost of Non-local assignment

Previously, our values did not change; only our names and bindings changed. When two names `a` and `b` were both bound to the value 4, it did not matter whether they were boud to the same 4.

However, functions with state do not behave this way:

1. Only function calls can introduce new frames.
2. Assignment statements always change bindings in existing frame.



##### Sameness and change

An expression that contains only pure function calls is **referentially transparent**, its value does not change if we substitute one of its subexpression with the value of that subexpression.

Rebinding operations violate the conditions of referential transparency because they do more than return a value; they change the enviroment.



#### 2.4.7 Implementing Lists and Dictionaries

#### 2.4.8 Dispatch Dictionaries

#### 2.4.9 Propagating Constraints