### 3 Defining New Functions

###### **Elemtents**

* Built-in data values and function
* Nested function application -- **combine operations**
* Binding names to values

###### **Define function**

* Built-in functions
* User-defined functions

-- bind name to compound operation

```python
>>> def square(x):
				return mul(x, x)
```

```python
def <name>(<formal parameters>):
    return <return expression>
```

* The second line must be **indented**
  * mostly 4 spaces
* The function evaluated only when the function is eventually applied.

```python
>>> def g():
...     return 1
... 
>>> g()
1
>>> g
<function g at 0x1034e2ef0>
>>> g = 2
>>> g
2
>>> g()
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: 'int' object is not callable
```

#### 3.1 <u>Environment</u>

* An **envirenment** in which an expression is evaluated consists of a sequence of **frames** depicted as **boxes**.
* Each frame contains **bindings**
* **Environment Diagram**
  * An **environment diagram** is a model we use to keep track of all the variables that have been defined and the values they are bound to.

* Function name
  * instrinsic name
  * bound name
* Function **Signature**
  * A description of the formal parameters of a function is called the funciton's signature.

#### 3.2 Calling User-Defined Functions

* Global frame
* Local frame
* **Name evaluation**
  * A name Evaluates to the value bound to that name in the earliest frame of the current environment in which that name is found.
  * Local frame -- global frame

##### <u>Call Expressions</u>

**Call expressions**, such as `square(2)`, apply functions to arguments. When executing call expressions, we create a new frame in our diagram to keep track of local variables:

1. Evaluate the **operator**, which should evaluate to a function.
2. Evaluate the **operands** from left to right.
3. Draw a **new frame**, labelling it with the following:
   - A unique **index** (`f1`, `f2`, `f3`, ...).
   - The **intrinsic name** of the function, which is the name of the function object itself. For example, if the function object is `func square(x) [parent=Global]`, the intrinsic name is `square`.
   - The **parent frame** ([`parent=Global`]).
4. **Bind** the formal parameters to the argument values obtained in step 2 (e.g. bind `x` to 3).
5. Evaluate the body of the function in this new frame until a return value is obtained. Write down the return value in the frame.



#### 3.3 Example

* A new local frame is introduced every tune a function is called.

#### 3.4 Local Names

* The parameter names of a function must remain **local** to the body of the function
* THe **scope** of a local name is limited to the body of the User-defined function that defines it.

#### 3.5 Chosing names

* Function names
  * lowercase
  * Separated by underscores
  * Descriptive
  * Evoke operations apllied to arguments
* Parameter names
  * lowercase
  * Separated by underscores
  * Single-word names are preferred
  * Evoke the role of the parameter

#### 3.6 Functions as Abstractions

* Function definition should be able to suppress details
* Black box
* **Aspects of a funtinoal abstraction**
  * **Domain**
  * **Range**
  * **Intent**

#### 3.7 Operators

###### <u>/ VS //</u>

```python
>>> 5 / 4
>>> truediv(5, 4)
1.25

>>> 5//4
>>> floordiv(5, 4)
1
```

