## Defining and Using Classes

### Static vs. Non-Static Methods

#### Instance Variables and Object Instantiation

- An `Object` in Java is an instance of any class.
- The `Dog` class has its own variables, also known as *instance variables* or *non-static variables*. These must be declared inside the class, unlike languages like Python or Matlab, where new variables can be added at runtime.
- The method that we created in the `Dog` class did not have the `static` keyword. We call such methods *instance methods* or *non-static methods*.
- To call the `makeNoise` method, we had to first *instantiate* a `Dog` using the `new` keyword, and then make a specific `Dog` bark. In other words, we called `d.makeNoise()` instead of `Dog.makeNoise()`.
- Once an object has been instantiated, it can be *assigned* to a *declared* variable of the appropriate type, e.g. `d = new Dog();`
- Variables and methods of a class are also called *members* of a class.
- Members of a class are accessed using *dot notation*.

#### Constructors in Java

#### Array Instantiation, Arrays of Objects

### Class Methods vs. Instance Methods

- Class methods, a.k.a. static methods.
- Instance methods, a.k.a. non-static methods.

```java
x = Math.sqrt(100);
```

### public static void main(String[] args)

- `public`: So far, all of our methods start with this keyword.
- `static`: It is a static method, not associated with any particular instance.
- `void`: It has no return type.
- `main`: This is the name of the method.
- `String[] args`: This is a parameter that is passed to the main method.

#### Command Line Arguments

### Using Libraries