#### Primiitive vs. Reference Types

* **Primitive** Types
  *  Are represented by a certain number of bytes stored at the location of the variable in memory.
  * **byte, short, int, long, float, double, boolean, char**

* **Reference** Types
  * are reprenseted by a memory address stored at the location of the variable which points to where the full object is.
  * This memory address is often refered to as a pointer
  * **Strings, Arrays, Linked Lists, Dogs, etc.**

* ==
  * compares the information at the location of the variable
  * only works for primitive types
  * compare to the address of the two reference types
* .equals()
  * works for reference type

#### Pass by value

* When you call a function and give it some argument, the function works receives an exact copy of those arguments, tied to its own local variable.
* It is a **shallow** copy, meaning that if a pointer to an object is passed, only the pointer is copied, and the object in memory is not.

#### Static vs. Instance

* Static variables and functions belong to the **whole class**.
* Instance variables and functions belong to each **individual instance**.



#### Linked LIsts

* Linked lists are modular lists that are made up of nodes that each contain a value and a **pointer** to the next node.
* `IntList intList = new IntList()`
* They can be **extended** or shortened by changing the pointers of its nodzs (unlike Arrays)
* They **can't be indexed directly** into like an array, instead the computer has to iterate through all of the nodes up to that point and follow their next pointers.