#### Classes

* **Subclasses** are classes that extend another class.
  * They have access to all of the functions and variables of their parent class in addition to any functions and variables defined in the child class.
* **Superclasses** are classes that are extended by another class.
* Classes can only extend **one** class but can be extended by many classes.

#### Interfaces

* **Interfaces** are **implemented** by classes. They describe a narrow ability that can apply to many classes that may or may not be related to one another.
* Interfaces are like **abstract classes** in that they do not usually implement the methods they specify.
* One class can implement **many** interfaces.
* `class Pitbull extends Dog implments Squishable, Photogenic{}`

#### Overloading vs. Overriding

* **Method Overloading** is done when ther are multiple methods with the smae name and return tyoe, but different parameters.
* **Method Overriding** is done when a **subclass** has a method with the exact same function signature as a method in its superclass.

#### Casting

* **Casting** allows our compiler to overlook cases where we are calling a method that belongs to a subclass on a variable that is statically typed to be the super class.
* `Animal a = new Dog();`
* `Dog d = (Dog) a;`

#### Dynamic Method Selection

* Compile Time
  * Check for valid variable assignments
  * Check for valid method calls (onlu considering static type and static superclasses)
* Run Time
  * Check for overridden methods
  * Ensure casted objects can be assigned to their variables