### Binary tree height

* The runtimes are dependent on the structure of the tree
  * **Worst case:**Θ(*N*) ---spindly -- linear -- Linked list
  * **Best-case:** Θ(log*N*) -- bushy

### BigO and worst case

* BigO is an upper bound.
* Worst-case is more restrictive than BigO.

### BST Performance

* depth
* height
* average depth

When we insert randomly into a BST the **average depth and height** are expected to be Θ(logN)

But in real life, we always insert data in sequence which lead to a spindy tree.



### B-trees

* **Crazy idea**: Never add a leaf node, just add to a current leaf node. -- to juicy
* Set a **limit** on the number of elements in a single node.
* When come to the limit, split the node in half by bumping up the middle left node.

##### B-trees or 2-3-4/2-3 Trees

* 2-3-4 tree can have 2, 3, or 4 children while a 2-3 tree can have 2 or 3

<u>**B-trees are always bushy.**</u>



### B-Tree invariants

A B-tree has the following helpful invariants:

- All leaves must be the **same distance** from the source.
- A non-leaf node with k*k* items must have exactly **k+1 children**.



### B-tree runtime

* *O*(Llog*N*) = *O*(log*N*) -- L is constant



### Summary

BSTs have best case height Θ(log*N*), and worst case height Θ(*N*).

- Big O is not the same thing as worst case!

**B-Trees are a modification of the binary search tree that avoids Θ(*N*) worst case.**

- Nodes may contain between 1 and L items.
- contains works almost exactly like a normal BST.
- add works by adding items to existing leaf nodes.
  - If nodes are too full, they split.
- Resulting tree has **perfect balance**. Runtime for operations is O*(log*N*).
- Have not discussed deletion. See extra slides if you’re curious.
- Have not discussed how splitting works if L > 3*L*>3 (see some other class).
- B-trees are more complex, but they can efficiently handle **ANY insertion order**.