### Trees and Traversals

#### Tree

* A set of nodes (vertices).
* A set of edges that connect those nodes
  * **Constraint:** There is exactly one path between any two nodes.

#### Rooted Tree

* A rooted tree is a tree with a desugnated root.
* A parent: Every node except the root has **exactly one** parent.
* A child: A node can have 0 or more children
  * Leaf



Trees are more ubiquitous than we realize.



### Tree Traversal

* Same as **iteration** in other data structures.
* Two ways
  * Level order traversal
  * Depth-First traversal

#### Level order Traversal

* Keep track of which level you are in

#### Pre-order Trasversal

```java
preOrder(BSTNode x) {
    if (x == null) return;
    print(x.key)
    preOrder(x.left)
    preOrder(x.right)
}
```

#### In-order Trasversal

```java
inOrder(BSTNode x) {
    if (x == null) return;    
    inOrder(x.left)
    print(x.key)
    inOrder(x.right)
}
```

#### Post-order Traversal

```java
postOrder(BSTNode x) {
    if (x == null) return;    
    postOrder(x.left)
    postOrder(x.right)
    print(x.key)   
}
```



### Graphs

* A graphs consists of

  * A set of nodes (vertices)

  * A set of zero or more edges, each of which connects two nodes

* All trees are also graphs.

* **Simple graphs** only.

#### More categorizations

* Directed and Undirected graphs
* Cyclic and asyclic graphs



### Graph problems

- **s-t Path**: Is there a path between vertices s and t?
- **Connectivity**: Is the graph connected, i.e. is there a path between all vertices?
- **Biconnectivity**: Is there a vertex whose removal disconnects the graph?
- **Shortest s-t Path**: What is the shortest path between vertices s and t?
- **Cycle Detection**: Does the graph contain any cycles?
- **Euler Tour**: Is there a cycle that uses every edge exactly once?
- **Hamilton Tour**: Is there a cycle that uses every vertex exactly once?
- **Planarity**: Can you draw the graph on paper with no crossing edges?
- **Isomorphism**: Are two graphs isomorphic (the same graph in disguise)?

#### One step at a time!

```java
mark s  // i.e., remember that you visited s already
if (s == t):
    return true;

for child in unmarked_neighbors(s): // if a neighbor is marked, ignore!
    if isconnected(child, t):
        return true;

return false;
```

* Depth first search
* Intuitively, we're going deep (i.e., down our family tree to our first child, our first child's first child aka our first grandchild, our first grandchild's first child, and so on... visiting this entire lineage), before we even touch our second child.